Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob to the MG
by Doctor Robert Vinton. He's a postdoctoral research fellow
within a project on epistemic injustice and previously also
a postdoctoral research fellow on a project on the
Epistemology of religious belief at the Nova University of
Lisbon. And today we're going to focus on the
book. He is the editor of Cognitive uh Wittgenstein
and the Cognitive Science of Religion, Interpreting human nature
and the mind. And toward the end, we're also
going to talk a little bit about epistemic injustice.
So, Doctor Vinton, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you for
having me on. I'm, I'm glad to have been
in finances.
Su
Sure.
So, um I've already had several different cognitive scientists
of religion on the show and that's also one
of the main reasons why when I got across
your book, I really wanted to invite you one.
So, uh but perhaps the approach that you bring
on into this book um is um different than
the one that is more mainstream in the cognitive
science of religion. So how do you try to
approach religion in the book? Exactly. OK.
So um my background actually isn't in the cognitive
science of religion. My background is in philosophy and
particularly the philosophy of uh Ludwig Fensin. And um
so I became interested in cognitive science of religion
through reading Finian critiques of cognitive science. And I
thought that those could be applied across over to
cognitive science of religion. I saw a lot of
the kind of mistakes that were being identified by
Vicks Finian's reappearing in the work of cognitive scientists
of religion. Um So, I su I suppose in
one sense, my approach, my own personal approach is
uh is uh a critical one from a Vicky
perspective. Um But within the book, there, there isn't
really a single approach to religion. There's uh a
variety of different contributors from quite different backgrounds. There's
uh Rita mcnamara who's a cross cultural psychologist, uh
Olympia Panagiotou studies history and uses neurocognitive approaches to
studying ancient rituals. Um There's some people with a
background in cognitive science of religion. So Roger Trigg
uh Hans Van Agen, um uh there's Casper Hes
who studies social neuroscience and then there's a, a
variety of philosophers as well. So um there's quite
a lot of different approaches to religion within the
book and there's disagreements between the authors as well.
So in, in some sense, I would say there
isn't a single approach within the book. Um There's,
there's quite a lot of different approaches and, and
disagreements between the different authors. On the other hand,
there is a commonality between the various authors. There's
a common interdisciplinary, which is something that I emphasize
in the, the introduction. And I think that's something
that's uh cognitive scientists of religion agree that their
discipline is, is basically an inter interdisciplinary discipline that
it, it takes on board insights from linguistics and
psychology and neuroscience, anthropology and kind of bring tries
to bring all of that evidence together along with
reflections on frameworks and things like that, philosophical uh
reflections as well. So there's a common interdisciplinary. Um
AND Wittgenstein is also a common thread throughout the
book. So 10 out of 11 of the chapters
discuss Wittgenstein explicitly and all of the chapters discuss
Vick and Stian themes in, in one way or
another. So, so yeah, there's, there's those two common
two com com common elements between the whole, the
whole book. Um And one more thing I I
would say about the book is that it's more
philosophical than empirical. So that's another thing that I
think the authors have in common is that it's,
it takes a step back from empirical reflections on
uh you know, data about religion or descriptions of
religious rituals. It's, it's more about the frameworks through
which we few religion, uh the relationships between the
various disciplines via which we might study religion. Uh
These kind of philosophical questions are at the center
of the book
a and apart from its interdisciplinary, how would you
characterize mainstream cognitive science of religion and in what
ways would you say, perhaps it differs from the
sorts of approaches that you have in your book?
Um So the first thing I'd say about cognitive
science of religion is that it's a, it's a
relatively young discipline. It's been around for about 30
years. If you, if you date it back to
Tom Lawson and Robert mcauley's book, uh what's it
called? Rethinking religion? Yeah, it's rethinking religion. Um That
book is sometimes identified as the kind of founding
document of cognitive science of religion and that was
published in 1990. Um And so it emphasizes commonalities
between uh participants in religious practices. Um QUITE often
taking uh an evolutionary approach to that. So, showing
that human cognitive abilities have certain things in common
as a result of human beings having involved in
a certain way. Um AND then looks at how
that might help us to understand religion. And I
mean, there, there are differences between different cognitive scientists,
but I, I suppose we'll, we'll get into some
of the ways in which the mainstream cognitive scientists
of religion uh uh do their work.
Uh Yes, we're, we're going to get into some
of that later in our conversation. But why Wittgenstein
in this particular case? I mean, in what ways,
uh I mean, general ways because we're going to
get into more detail. W would uh would you
say his work connects to the, not necessarily the
cognitive science, but perhaps more broadly the science of
religion?
Um So, uh one reason that I uh wanted
to bring wittenstein into this is just my background,
but I'm, I have a particular interest in Wittgenstein
uh myself. Um And there has been a bit
of an interest amongst Finian's in cognitive science in
recent years. So, one of the books that inspired
me um to take an interest in this was
uh Peter Peter Hacker and uh Maxwell Bennett's book
on the Philson Foundations of Neuroscience. And it struck
me that a lot of the criticisms of cognitive
science and neuroscience that they make in that book
can carry over to cognitive science of religion. So
that's one reason for bringing fensin into this. So,
so uh one of those criticisms is that there
is a bit of a tendency within cognitive science
of religion to muddle together neuroscientific language and psychological
language. Um So one very straightforward way in which
they do that is to talk about the mind
as if it's synonymous with the, the brain and
to use the expressions, mind and brain interchangeably. Why,
why Fensin was the question? Yeah. Um So, so
there's lots of reasons actually. So um for one
thing, Wittgenstein had quite a lot to say about
religion in his work and some of that was
commenting on people like uh James Fraser and The
Golden Bough, which I think can be seen as
a precursor to the kind of work that you
get in cognitive science of religion these days. So
it was a scientific attempt to, to grapple with
uh religious ritual and magic. Um And Wittgenstein made
criticisms of Fraser, which I think carry over to
some of the work in cognitive science of religion
today. Um So there's, there's an interest in religion
in Wittenstein. There's also an interest in uh the
correct use of psychological terms and particular, particularly in
uh terms like belief, knowledge, certainty in his later
work in uh uncertainty. So I think some of
Wittenstein s reflections on, on uh psychological expressions on
cognition are gonna be relevant as well to cognitive
science of, of religion. Um Yeah. So uh by,
by the way, since, since you've already mentioned, uh
Wittgenstein's examinations of uh concepts like belief, knowledge, certainty
and so on. Uh I have this question saved
for later in our conversation, but perhaps it's good
to introduce it now. Uh How do you think
that notions like that? And also notions like uh
thought and faith, it would fit into a naturalistic
framework because since we're talking about the science of
religion here, um we're basically approaching things through that
sort of framework,
right? Yeah. Well, I, I mean, I think from
a F and Stian perspective, you might wonder whether
they do fit into a naturalistic framework at all.
Um uh It, depending on what you mean by
naturalistic. So naturalism is sometimes taken, I think, to
be synonymous with, with scientism. Um, AND in that
sense, fensin certainly wouldn't think that, that you could
give a naturalistic account of these psychological expressions. Um,
I mean, obviously this is something that cognitive scientists
of religion think you can do. So, uh, cognitive
science of religion is, that's exactly what it's all
about. Right. It's about a scientific investigation of notions
like belief and knowledge and faith uh from a,
from a scientific perspective. Um uh II, I wonder
if I, I might say a bit more later
on, I think about Wittgenstein and, and, and naturalism.
But um but that's how, how I'll, I'll answer
that one for now. OK.
Uh And do, do you know if there's been
lots of interaction or not so much between people
working in the cognitive science of religion and people
working on Wittgenstein's philosophy? I mean, do you know
at all if the cognitive scientists of religion, for
example, are aware of work uh on religion than
by, by the wits and if they take it
seriously at all or if they are aware of
it, but just don't uh take it very seriously.
I mean, what do you know about it?
I don't, so I don't think there is a
huge amount of interaction between cognitive scientists of religion
and Fenians. I know uh in the Lawson and
mcauley book that I mentioned before, rethinking religion, they
mentioned Peter Winch, there's a bit of discussion of
Peter Winch there and they're critical of Peter Winch.
And I wonder if that's been influential in um
putting people off a kind of thick and Stian
approach to understanding uh religion. Um But I think
probably um part of the reason that there hasn't
been a huge amount of interaction is just the
way in which academia works that people are divided
up into different departments, different disciplines and they tend
to interact with people from their own discipline. So,
you know, although I in the book uh say
that it's, it's a, it's a virtue to, to
kind of have interaction between different disciplines and that
it's going to be fruitful. Actually in my professional
life, I tend to mostly mix with other philosophers.
And even more than that, I tend to mix
particularly with finian philosophers. I go to conferences with
Wickens Stans. Um And if I'm not going to
Wittenstein conferences, I go to philosophy conferences and I
very, very rarely go to a conference where I'm
going to interact with somebody from uh from another
discipline. And a lot of people working in the
cognitive science of religion work in other departments, they
work in religious studies or they work in psychology
um or anthropology. So they probably don't come across
philosophers all that much, let, let alone Vick and
Stinn philosophers. So that would be one reason why
there's not very much interaction. Um But it, it's
not as though there's no interaction whatsoever. So, some
of the contrib contributors to the book, uh Roger
Trigg, uh he was involved in a project on
cognitive science of religion. He's edited a book on
cognitive science of Religion with Justin Barrett. Um And
he's also written about Fensin in the past. So
he has an interest in, in both. He's quite
critical of wittenstein, but he at least takes an
interest in, in Fensin and philosophy. And he's contributed
a discussion of Fensin to this, to this volume.
Uh Christopher Hoyt, one of the other contributors to
the volume. Um I saw him give a presentation
on Fensin and cognitive science um at a conference
in Seville a few years ago and I was
impressed by that. And so I asked him to
contribute to the, to the volume so that there
is a bit of awareness um between the two
cups and there's some that kind of that are
not quite in either camp as well. So the,
the guy a still contributes a, a chapter and
he's, he works in philosophy, philosophy of religion, but
he's not particularly interested in Fensin. Um And he
doesn't focus entirely on cognitive science of religion, but
he has a bit of interest in body. Um
Yeah, but unfortunately, I think there, there isn't a
huge amount of interaction between the two. And that
was one of, one of the motivations for the
book was to, to bring people together
And by the way, let me just mention uh
some of the names that you mentioned, there are
people that I've had on the show like Justin
Barrett, Robert mcauley and also from your own book,
uh I'm releasing an interview with Casper Hesp in
just a few months, it's already recorded, but by
the time we're recording this one, it's not out
yet. Uh And also I think that uh on,
on your book you also have in Zolli.
That's right. Yeah. She, she writes a chapter jointly
with Casper Hes. Yeah. So she's from a philosophy
background and he's from a neuroscientific background and they've
written a paper together.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I have interviews with all
those people on the show if people want to
check them out and also because they might get
a little bit more familiar with some of the
ideas from both sides here.
Sure. Sure. It's a wonderful resource show podcast. I
mean, it's enormous, isn't it the number of interviews
that you've done? There's hundreds of them there and
uh you know, lots and lots of different, interesting
people to, to look, to look into. So, yeah,
I, I'd recommend that people come and come and
take a look.
Well, thank you so much. And by the way,
do you think that perhaps one of the reasons
why there's not been lots of interaction between the
cognitive scientists of religion and the Wiens as also,
or would also have to do with them, uh
coming into the discussion or into the science of
religion with different theoretical frameworks. Do you think that's
perhaps one of the reasons?
Yeah. Sure. Sure. I mean, you, but I, I
suppose it, in both cases, there's a, there's a
broad spectrum of, of, uh, of opinion. So within
wittenstein studies, wittenstein is quite a dense and difficult
philosopher. And so there's lots and lots of different
interpretations given of, of his work. Um And within
cognitive science of religion, there are obviously differences as
well. I mean, we've mentioned people like uh mcauley
and Lawson and uh Boy a and um and
Barrow and I think there's quite a lot of
similarities between their work. Um But there are other
other people working in the cognitive science of religion
who I think are probably closer to a vic
and Stian kind of approach.
Mhm And what would you say are the main
critiques of contemporary uh cognitive science of religion by
Wittgenstein or, or even cognitive science more broadly?
OK. So uh I mentioned the book by Peter
Hacker and Maxwell Bennett earlier. That was one of
the books that inspired me to uh engage in
this, this project. Um And the central critique that
they make of um cognitive science and work in
neuroscience that they identify from a finian perspective is
that they commit what, what they call the Mereological
fallacy. And that's the fallacy of attributing to a
part of a thing, things that only properly apply
to the whole thing. So, in particular, they think
it's a mistake to apply psychological predicates to something
less than a whole, a whole preacher. And so
they're inspired by Wittgenstein's remark, I've got the quote
here. Only if a living human being and what
resembles in brackets behaves like a human being. Can
one say that it has sensations it sees is
blind hears, is deaf, is conscious or unconscious. So,
Wittenstein, there is making a, a remark about what
it makes sense to say. So he, he thinks
it makes sense to, to ascribe psychological properties to
human beings and things that behave like human beings,
but not to some as a stone or something
like that. Um So it makes sense to say
Ricardo has a headache. Um It makes sense to
talk about animals having AAA kind of psychological life
if I see my cat walking out into the
garden looking at a bird and following the bird's
movements, chasing it towards a tree. Uh And I
see my cat staring up at the tree, I
think I could appropriately say that my cat thinks
that the bird is up the tree. Um And
that's because the cat exhibits behavior that's similar to
human beings in some ways that it moves towards
things that it's interested in and looks at them.
And uh but what what that means if we
accept what Wittgenstein says, what it means is that
we can't ascribe psychological states to brains or to
parts of brains. And that's something that cognitive scientists
of religion do all of the time. So, uh
uh Pascal Boyer, whose work I discuss in my
chapter, he talks about inference systems in the brain,
uh perceiving things, inferring things, understanding things, uh all
kinds of psychological predicates applied to parts of brains.
But of course, parts of brains can't behave in
a manner similar to human beings as my cat
can. And so it doesn't make sense to talk
in that way um about parts of brains. Um
So related to that, I think one problem that
Finian's have with both cognitive scientists of religion and
with the precursors to the cognitive scientists, uh cognitive
science of religion is uh the idea that there's
uh an unwarranted intellectualism in their work. So there's
this idea that that what they're interested in studying
human cognition is hidden uh in people's brains or
in their minds hidden behind behavior in that it
has to be inferred from visible behavior. And so
what you need is uh scientific work in order
to uncover what's hidden. And so, Finian's criticize that
by saying that this is a kind of uh
a misconceived picture, a Cartesian picture of the mind
where the mind is something inner and private and
hidden. Uh And it's entirely logically independent of the
behavior of, of human beings. Um So I, I
think they're probably the two central critiques. Um BUT
I mean, there's lots of other things that you
can say as well.
Yeah, of course. And the book gets into many
more of those critiques. Uh But of course, we
don't have time to explore them all here today.
Um But going back to the naturalistic bit that
I mentioned earlier. So, is religion a natural phenomenon
or at least according to the Witkin Stian, do
you think that we should approach religion as a
natural phenomenon or not?
Again, I suspect that this is gonna be an
area where Vick Andys probably disagree. I, I think
um so some finin I think are probably going
to be resistant to, to reasons altogether. Um Just
because of the thick Andy and uh uh uh
distaste for theory. Um And um so there, there's
two philosophers write about naturalism within the book. There's
a chapter by Thomas Carroll and there's a chapter
by Guy Axel and they both look at this
different aspects of, of this question. And I myself,
I'm inclined to give an answer along the lines
that Thomas Carroll does in the book. And it's
a kind of uh it's a bit of a
philosopher's answer to it. And, and that is to
say, well, depends on what you mean by natural
and depends on what you mean by naturalism. Um
And so natural as it's used by us, just
in our ordinary language, I think is used in
a way that has lots and lots of different
contrasts. It's used with different meanings within our ordinary
language and within technical philosophy as well. Naturalism is
used in different ways. Um And so in religion,
there's a contrast between the natural and the supernatural.
So you might think about that as being the,
the relevant contrast where what you're thinking about as
a uh is a distinction between the world as
it's studied by science and the supernatural realm of
God and angels and spirits. Um There's a discussion
in cognitive science of religion that is discussed in
Guy Axel's chapter where um some cognitive scientists of
religion claim that religion is, is natural. Uh WHEREAS
science isn't natural and what they mean by that
is that religion kind of comes easily to us
given that we're the kind of creatures that we
are. So we've evolved to have a certain kind
of cognitive system and that cognitive system inclines us
towards taking on board, certain things quite easily but
not, not other things. And religion is one of
the things that we take on board quite, quite
easily according to some of the people in the
cognitive science of religion. So there's a book by
Robert mcauley, which you're probably familiar with that, I
think, is it called Religion is Natural and
science? I think, I think it's why religion is
natural and science is not. I think that's the
thing.
OK. Um Oh yeah, that's exactly his claim is
that um and, and there there are other philosophers
claim similar things. So boy, a make similar arguments
about religious concepts being ones that we that are
easily spread. Um So religion is something that is
eas easily catches on. Whereas science is something that
involves counterintuitive inclusion conclusions, it involves quite a lot
of work. It's not something that comes so naturally
to us. Um But so just carrying on with
the naturalism thing, OK, you might say that there
is a kind of naturalism within the work of
Fensin. So that's a claim that Thomas Carroll makes
in his chapter of the book. And there are,
there are, um there are elements of Wickens Tin's
work that lend support to that interpretation. So there's
a passage that Carol quotes from Wickens Tin's remarks
on Fraser's Golden Bow. Uh So Fensin says the
characteristic feature of the awakening mind of man is
precisely the fact that a phenomenon comes to have
meaning for him. One could almost say that man
is a ceremonial animal. So there, it seems that
Wickens Sein wants to characterize human beings as, as
having something in common that they're, they're inclined towards
ceremonial or ritualistic behavior and that they're inclined to
find meaning in things. The example that he gives
is fire, that people see fire and they, you
know, they're struck by it, it makes an impression
on them. Um Iii I in a way that
it, that, that it only could to the kind
of creatures that we are the creatures that, who
live meaningful lives that who see things in a
kind of symbolic way. Um And you might think
that that's something that, that kind of all human
beings share, regardless of whether they're religious or not.
There is this symbolic meaning finding aspect to human
beings and uh a ritualistic and ceremonial aspect to
human beings live. So, y you know, there, there
are religious ceremonies that are associated with burying people,
for example, but it isn't only religious people who
engage in ceremonies like that. There's, in fact, I,
I, there's very few people I think who, if
somebody dies, they say just stick them in the
ground, they're, they're dead now. You, you need to
kind of mark the, the passing of somebody in,
in some way to honor their memory, to remember
them, you know, these kind of things and, and
people tend to have a, a ceremony built around
that and get together and celebrate people's lives and
um you know, tell stories about people and things
like that. So, so, yeah, there's, there's this naturalistic
interpretation that you might put on Fens Sein's work.
Um But as I said before, if, if naturalism
is taken to mean scientism, then I think that's
certainly not present in, in Wickens Tin's work.
Mhm. Uh So there are two or three other
ISMs that I would like to ask you about
here that some of your co-author also talk about
in the book, uh What about reductionism? I, I
mean, do you think, or would you say that
the cognitive science of religion is, tends to be
reductionistic? And if so in what ways would that
be an issue according to the Wittgenstein?
OK. So, first of all, I'll, I'll, I'll just
tell you a little bit about what reductionism is.
So, uh there's a, a definition that I pulled
up from JJ C Smart. Um He says that
X reduces to why? Only if X does not
exist over and above why. Um So there's a,
an ontological spin that you might put on reductionism
where, what you're claiming is that if wine re
um if, if X reduces to wine, then X
is nothing, nothing but wine, right? In, in terms
of what exists. Um So you might claim that
uh all of the chemical things that exist uh
um are, are, are basically made, they're made up
of atoms. And so, and atoms are more fundamental.
And so you might say then that chemistry reduces
to, to physics on that basis. Uh ONTOLOGICAL, the
kind of things that exist in chemistry are just
the kind of things that exist in physics and
nothing more. But you might also make a AAA
claim about reductionism in explanatory terms. So you might,
you might say, regardless of whether one thing reduces
to another in ontological terms, you might think that
think that things at one level are explainable in
terms of things at another level. So it might
be that you claim that chemical reactions, things that
go on in chemistry are explainable in terms of
the property of atoms and the interaction of atoms
they're explainable in, in the terms of atomic physics.
Um So particularly relevant to the discussions in my
book is uh reductionism from the mental to the
physical or, or psychological to the neurological. Um And
I, I think that there is a problematic kind
of reductionism present in quite a lot of the
work of cognitive scientists of religion. So, one of
the things that I mentioned before was this, this
tendency to use the, the word mind and the,
the word brain interchangeably as if they mean exactly
the, the same thing. Um And to talk about
brain processes, perceiving things and understanding things, I, I
think is uh another aspect of that. Um Yeah.
So, so that's, that's how I'd answer that question.
So earlier, you've also touched on scientism. You said
basically that Wittgenstein himself and the Wittgenstein ins more
broadly uh take issue with it. But what does
scientism mean?
Exactly. So the, the definition that I use in
the book is one taken from Hans Johan Klos
uh Fensin Dictionary. And Haar Klock is uh uh
Fensin scholar. He was my supervisor in reading some
years ago. Um And I think he, he gives
a good definition. Uh So he defines scientism as
the imperialist tendencies of scientific thinking that result from
the idea that science is the measure of all
things. Um And so as you say, this is
something that you find within the work of Fensin
himself. I've got the blue book here. And so
in the blue book, Fensin talks about our craving
for generality. And uh on page 18 of the
blue book, if anyone wants to look it up,
um Wittgenstein says our craving for genera, uh our
craving for generality has another main source, our preoccupation
with the method of science. I mean, the method
of reducing the explanation of natural phenomena to the
smallest possible number of primitive natural laws. Philosophers constantly
see the method of science before their eyes and
are irresistibly tempted to ask and answer questions in
the way science does. This tendency is the real
source of metaphysics and leads the philosopher into complete
darkness. Sosin there is clearly opposed to philosophers conceiving
their own work as being uh something akin to
work in the natural sciences. And he doesn't think
that you should import methods of the natural sciences
into philosophy. He thinks that's a mistake because he
thinks philosophical problems are essentially uh grammatical or conceptual
problems. And that what philosophy aims at is understanding
through um to getting to grips with our our
concept. But the the problems that philosophers fall into,
they fall into as a result of of misusing
certain terms that crop up in philosophical problems. So
it might be knowledge that gets misused, say or
being. Um And what the philosopher needs to do
is to look carefully at how these terms are
ordinarily and correctly used contrast that with the way
that the philosopher is using them and point out
that the philosopher is, is misusing them in some
way according to our, the, the the ordinary rules
for their use. And so they're not talking as
we ordinarily do about knowledge or about being there
talking in some other peculiar philosophical way about things
and that's why they get into a mud. Um
So you, there's within Wickens Sein's work, there's a
rejection of scientism in philosophy. Um But of course,
scientism isn't something that is just a uh a
problem identified by Vian. It's something that the cognitive
scientists of religion themselves talk about. They say that
they're wary of scientism that you can't construe all
of the disciplines involved in cognitive science of religion
as being natural scientific ones. Um And recently, so
as you say, I've been um involved recently in
a, a project on epistemic injustice and I've been
reading a book by Jonathan Khan Race on the
brain. I don't know if you've come across that
and he's a legal scholar and he um he
looks at the way in which legal scholars have
looked at scientific work on unconscious bias uh as
a way of resolving legal disputes about racism. And
um there's a bit of a tendency amongst these
legal scholars who look to the the the implicit
bias um literature, to privileged science over other disciplines.
So that there's, he thinks there's a kind of
scientism present there. And why is that problematic? Well,
because there are, there are psychological or neurophysiological aspects
perhaps to understanding racism, but that's not the whole
story. So part of the story is uh about
the ways in which society is structured about power
relations, um about the way in which prejudice is
embedded within institutions. And so he objects to thinking
about racism just in terms of these biases that
people have as individuals. Um And so there, I
think he's identifying a kind of scientism as being
problematic within legal studies. Um A, a privilege uh
an unwarranted privileging of science. Um Are you a
humanistic disciplines? Right? Social scientific disciplines.
Mhm So just to cover one more is here
before we get into what you say or what
you write about in your chapter on Pascal Boyer's
understanding of religion. Um There's also you also talk
about you, I, I mean, by you, I mean,
you and your co-author also talk about cultural relativism
in the book. And you claim that um the
cognitive science of religion might have been a response
to cultural relativism in a way. So could you
explain that in what ways might it have been
a response to that?
Yeah. So um relativism looks at differences between cognitive
frameworks uh between the values and the practices of
different societies. So the, the focus of cultural relativism
is gonna be on cultural differences, differences in values
and perhaps the, the worry that these might be
incommensurable, you know, that there, that there are uh
uh conceptual differences in the way that people conceive
of time or of color or, uh I, I
suppose, particularly significantly or uh of values. Um And
that there's no way then to resolve differences between
the, the different cultures because they have in incommensurable
concepts or incommensurable values. Um COGNITIVE science of religion,
on the other hand, because the focus is on
the way in which human beings as a whole
have developed evolutionarily and common uh common cognitive features
of human beings that result from that, that common
evolutionary heritage. There's, there's a an emphasis on what
human beings have in common as opposed to what,
what divides them. So, so cognitive science of religion
I think is, is uh sits in contrast to
cultural relativism in that way. So human beings have
in common, for example, that they uh they tend
to over detect agency. So this is one of
the things that gets disgusting, cognitive science of religion,
quite a lot that cognitive uh that human beings
because they evolved to uh prey upon pre and
because human beings were predating, they needed to look
out for other agents in their environment, they needed
to look out for food sources and they needed
to also look out for things that might kill
them.
I think that there, you're referring to what the
cognitive scientists of religion called the hyperactive agency detection
device.
Yeah, that, so that's one of the ways of
referring to it. Yeah. So the, the hyperactive bit
there is that what human beings tend to do
is they tend to overestimate the agency in their
environment according to cognitive scientists of religion because of
the way they've evolved because it's beneficial to human
beings to do that because it's better to think
that there's an agent in your vicinity and there
isn't rather than not to identify an agent in
your environment that might kill you or might be
a source of food. Um So human evolutionary history
explains why humans tend to think that there are
more agents in their environment than there in fact
are. And they take that to be an explanation
for things like seeing spirits or belief in God
or. Mhm.
Yeah. I, I mean, they try to many times
boil it down to evolve the adaptations in terms
of them having increased our uh fitness,
right?
It's something, uh uh they use terms like that,
right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, so there's, there's things
that have aided us in our survival throughout the
evolutionary history that have kind of structured the way
we are cognitively and um that's something that's common
to human beings in general. Um So within Wickens
tin's work as well, there's, as I've already said,
there's some emphasis on, on common features of human
beings. So there, there is this uh common tendency
towards finding meaning in things and to uh towards
ceremony. But there is also present within Wittgenstein hints
of relativism. So some people have found relativism within
Wittgenstein's work. So there is of course, within Wittenstein,
uh the an emphasis on the point that our
con our concepts might have been different than they
in fact are. So uh he likes to imagine
circumstances in which um in, in which things in
the world are different than they in fact are.
And that, and that impacts upon the way in
which people categorize things in the, in the world.
Um So there's, there's uh uh this emphasis on
the possibility of human beings having different concepts. And
of course, you know, it's an empirical fact as
well that human beings throughout the world do conceptualize
things in different ways to each other in certain
ways. Um There's also within Wittgenstein, this um possibility
that people might have different hinges, what he calls
hinges. Um So what he's referring to there is
that people might have different um certainties that they
might be certain of quite different things. And sometimes
Fensin puts a, puts this into a, a kind
of religious way of thinking about things. So he,
he counter poses uh the way in which a
Catholic might think about things to the way in
which a non-catholic might think about things. So he
he takes it that it's a hinge or a
certainty amongst most non-catholics that people have two parents.
But he says Catholics think that Jesus only had
one human parent and he, he says, uh and
others might think that there are humans with no
parents at all. Um So there's, there's this worry
of, of, of relat rela relativism that arises out
of the fact that human beings might have different
fundamental religious beliefs, different fundamental values. Um These are
all things that fensin kind of acknowledges um in,
in uncertainty and which might lead us to, to
towards a kind of relativism. So if we think
that these fundamental certainties aren't something that we can
uh discuss rationally and come to a resolution of
the problem rationally, then you might think that there's,
there's a problem uh of relativism there that, that,
that one set of hinges can't be justified relative
to another set of hinges.
Mhm. So let's get then into your chapter on
Pascal Boyer. So uh how would you summarize his
views? I mean, the way by which he understands
and approaches religion.
Um So we've already mentioned these, these systems in
the brain and um the inference systems, what he
calls inference systems are, are absolutely central to the
way that Pascal Boyer understands religion. So he thinks
that we have this agency detection system, the hyper
hyperactive agency detective system that you were talking about.
He also thinks that we have what he calls
uh an intuitive physics system. Um He thinks that
we have something called an intuitive psychology system which
makes inferences about the thoughts and feelings and beliefs
of other people. So we have all these things,
computational processes going on in our brain inferences going
on um that are, that are um activated by
stimuli in our environment. So, um the intuitive physics
system might be stimulated by seeing one billiard ball
hit another billiard ball. Um TO take an, I
think that's an example that Boyer himself uses, but
it's an example that goes back to hume. Um
And in, in a sort of human fashion, Boyer
says that what then happens is that we then
infer that there's a cause present between the two
events, the event of one billiard ball approaching the
other billiard ball and then the other billiard ball
moving. But the, the, the intuitive physics system in
our mind infers that there is a cause present
when it's stimulated by um seeing these, these events
in our environment. Um So Boyer, he thinks we've
got these, these various um systems and I've got
a quote from Boyer here. Let's see if I
can find it. Yeah. So these inference systems, they're
made to do a huge amount of work in
Boyer's book. I th I think basically they do
all of the work really in, in explaining religion.
So here's a quote from Boyer. He says the
activation of a panoply of systems in the mind
explains the very existence of religious concepts and their
cultural success and the fact that people find them
plausible and the fact that not everyone finds them.
So and the way religion appeared in human history
and its persistence in the context of modern science.
So the ba basically wants to say that the
the discovery of these various systems in the brain
cognitive science, it can explain, you know, a huge
amount of things uh that we want to understand
about religion. It can explain the spread of religious
concepts. It can explain why people engage in certain
religious rituals. Um Yeah. So I I think in
summary, that's, that's Pascal Fer's Boyer's theories that, that
we have these inference systems in our brain. And
that if, if we look at the results of
studies in psychology and in cognitive science, they can
inform the way in which we understand religion. Mhm
Yeah. By, by the way, also for the audience,
I have a handful of interviews, one of them
with Pascal Boyer himself, by the way, where we
talk about what people in psych developmental psychology and
some areas of anthropology refer to as core knowledge
that is intuitive physics, intuitive biology and intuitive psychology
sometimes in instead of intuitive, they was they use
the word folk, folk physics, folk biology, folk psychology.
Uh But yeah, I have a handful of interviews
with people on the show evolutionary psychologists, anthropologists about
that. So um and And so from a Wittgenstein
in perspective, what would be your critique here of
those in or that that approach based on influence
systems?
Uh So, first of all, there's the, the criticism
that I've already mentioned coming from Vick and Stian
philosophers. So the first criticism that we might make
of Boyer is that what Boyer is doing here
in talking about inference systems in the way that
he does is misusing psychological concepts. So uh Boyer
doesn't only say that these inference systems can explain
these various aspects of religion. He all of the
time, he's attributing psychological um states to these infant
systems. So he says that the the inference systems
perceive things in our environment uh that they understand
things that they interpret things, um obviously being called
infer systems, they're inferring things all the time. Um
And so these are the kind of things that
we would ordinarily attribute to human beings, right? The
human beings compute that they infer that they perceive.
Um And so if fensin is right, that psychological
expressions are only properly properly uh applied to human
beings and creatures that behave like human beings, then
Pascal Boyer has gotta be wrong to attribute psychological
states to infer systems in the brain or to
any part of the brain because the brain can't
behave like a human being. Um So that criticism
of Boyer is connected with uh another criticism that
we might make. So as Fensin notes, there are
behavioral criteria that are associated with psychological concepts. So
there's the remark I've already quoted to you where
he talks about psychological concepts being attributable to human
beings and creatures that behave like them. Uh There's
other passages within his work where he talks about
how it is that we learn concepts like pain
and how it is that we attribute paying to
other people. And his answer to that is that
there are behavioral criteria by which we um attribute
those states to, to other people. So things like
crying and wincing and saying I'm in pain, these
kind of behaviors, they're not just kind of accidentally
or contingently associated with the, the mental state. In
question, there's a, a logical connection between those behaviors
and, and the pain. Um And that logical connection
is obscured by the fact that people can, people
can um suppress those behaviors. So people need not
behave in that way when they're in pain. Pe
people need not give any sign that they're in
pain. Uh OR they might pretend to be in
pain when they're not. Uh OR yeah, they, they,
they might hide their plane for one reason or
another. So, so there, there is sometimes a mismatch
between what's going on, be behaviorally and what's going
on psychologically. And I think that that mismatch between
the behavior and the psychology is what has led
some people to think that there's no logical connection
between the two at all. And that's Boyer's view,
right? So Boyer thinks that the internal realm is
entirely logically disconnected from the behavioral realm. It's, it's
hidden behind behavior rather than the behavior being criteria
for the, the psychological stuff. Um So a second
criticism that you might then make in connection with
that is, is the boy a holds a kind
of Cartesian view of the mind. So, so although
he wouldn't accept that label, he wouldn't think of
himself as being Cartesian. Um So he, he doesn't
believe in the, in the Cartesian view that there's
a uh a material substance and a and an
immaterial substance. That's not, that's not what I'm referring
to here, but what he does believe and that
they, that, that Descartes believes is that there is
a, a logical disconnection between the mental or the
psychological realm and the physical and the behavioral realm.
Um And that what, what we have to do
because thoughts are hidden, we have to infer psychology
from their behavior. So there's a kind, there's a
kind of Cartesian aspect to Boyer's work and lots
of other work in the cognitive science of religion,
which I think is, is problematic um from a
victim Stian perspective. Um Yeah. OK. I'll leave it
at that for now. OK.
Uh And I guess that also sort of related
to what you talked about when you mentioned intuitive
physics, biology and psychology, there's also these very common
idea among researchers in the cognitive science of religion
about uh theory of mind or mind reading and
how and how these sort of Western model of
the mind uh w would, would also apply cross
culture across all cultures. So, uh I, I mean,
from a Wittgenstein in perspective, uh what do you
think about that? And if it doesn't apply cross
culturally, what would be the implications for the study
of religion?
Uh So, so I think this is a further
criticism that you can make of Boyer's work actually
is that there's a kind of scientism present in,
in Boyer's work. So what it means that this
division, this strict division between the inner and the
outer, it means that there's always work to be
done in uncovering what's going on in the inner
realm. And so this is where science comes in,
right? So, so uh the idea then is that
cognitive science is needed to uncover what is hidden.
Um And that's also related to the, the idea
of a theory of mind, I think um the
idea that there, that there's something theoretical about the
way in which we attribute uh psychological states, um
beliefs, pains, et cetera to, to our, to our
fellow human beings. Um So I, I think as
a vic and Stian, I'm very wary of this
talk of theory of mind at all. I, I
think it's a, it's a bit of an uh
an odd way of talking about things. I don't
think babies or chimpanzees or, or adult human beings
have a, have a theory of mind unless they're
doing psychology, right? Um Just in, in just attributing
mental states to other people, that's a perfectly ordinary
everyday non theoretical activity. But the, the, the reason
that the reason that people think of it as
something theoretical I think is that they're, they're holding
on to this kind of Cartesian picture where the
inner is something hidden that has to be unburied
by science. It's a bit like you have to
uh um observe uh certain things in order to
detect what's going on with atoms that are hidden.
The, the, the psychological is conceived in a similar
way to, to the atomic. And I think that's
a mistaken analogy that the psychological isn't analogous analogous
to the, to the atomic in that way. Mhm
So, uh I mean, of course, as I said,
there are many other critiques that you and your
co-author is explore in your book. But now for
the last part of our conversation, I would like
to ask you actually about a new project that
you working on right now on epistemic injustice. Uh
Could you tell us a little bit about that?
And, and by the way, just to introduce the
topic to uh for the audience, uh I mean,
what is epistemic injustice exactly?
OK. So the, the coin uh the, the, the
term was coined by uh Miranda Fricker in her
book, uh epistemic injustice, which has become a bit
of a, a classic in the field that's inspired
a lot of the work in the field. Um
And she distinguishes two kinds of epistemic injustice, two
basic kinds of epistemic injustice, uh testimonial, injustice, and
hermeneutic injustice. So, what she's talking about are injustices
that are connected with uh human beings as being
knowing and believing creatures. So that's the epi epistemic
side of things, right? So, epistemology is this the
theory of knowledge or the study of knowledge, belief
and justification. Um So, epistemic injustice is injustice in
the area of uh epistemic things. So, injustice in
relation to knowledge and belief and justification. Um So,
in particular, um testimonial injustice that Friar talks about
this is the injustice of somebody offering up testimony
and not being believed due to a prejudice that
the hearer has. And so the, the speaker here,
the person giving their testimony um is trying to
convey some information to somebody else. They're perfectly believable.
There's no reason to disbelieve them, let's imagine. But
the, the heer nonetheless does not believe them because
they're prejudiced in some way because they're racist or
because they're sexist uh or because they're homophobic, they
think that the person in question uh you know,
is, isn't trustworthy on this issue when in fact,
they have no reason to think that this person
is untrustworthy. So, in that case, uh an epistemic
injustice has been done to that person. They're a
victim of prejudice, but they're also a victim of
prejudice in their capacity as a, as a knower
and as a as somebody offering up knowledge to
other people. Um So the other form of epistemic
injustice that Miranda Fricker talks about is hermeneutic injustice.
And that's the injustice of people not having the
hermeneutic resources uh to, to understand their own oppressed
condition. So the example that she gives is the
example of sexual harassment. So the concept of sexual
harassment is a relatively recent one. And until uh
women got together and discussed what was happening to
them in the workplace, the the abuses that they
were facing until they started to conceptualize it as
sexual harassment, they didn't fully understand their own uh
oppression that the, the, the, the way in which
they are being harassed. Um So there, there's, there
are gaps in the conceptual resources in society. Uh
The hermeneutic resources more generally it that are unfavorable
to certain people um that she points to so
that they're the two forms of epistemic injustice that
Miranda Fricker talks about. Um BUT you might think
that it's broader than that, right? So Fria doesn't
own epistemic injustice and I mean, it's quite natural
to expand the term in certain ways. So if,
if, if what we're talking about is injustices done
to people in their capacity as, as know as
then we might think that there's various other forms
of um epistemic injustice. So one form of epistemic
injustice that people have pointed to is that oppressed
people might in fact have better hermeneutic resources than
their oppressors for understanding their situation. So it might
be that oppressed people in virtue of being oppressed
have a better understanding of their condition than the
people that are oppressing them. Um But nonetheless, the
conceptual uh resources that are available within society don't
reflect uh don't reflect that. So there are gaps
in the conceptual resources of the people that aren't
oppressed in that in that way. And so the
people that aren't doing uh that aren't oppressed or
perhaps the people doing the oppressing, they're the ones
that have gaps in their conceptual resources. And, and
that's a problem for the oppressed because people within
the society don't understand their oppression. So it might
be that, I don't know, say black people have
a very good understanding of the ways in which
they're being oppressed. But other people in that society
don't have the conceptual resources that, that the oppressed
people do. And that is therefore a problem for
the, the people that are oppressed because they try
to talk to other people about their oppression and
don't get understood as a result of that. Or,
or it might be that the the misunderstanding is
wilful, right? So it might be that the people
doing the oppressing recognize that, that there are certain
gaps in the collective hermeneutic resources that are disadvantaged
people and they might deliberately obscure those her hermeneutic
resources. Uh I think I've rambled enough there, but
I just want to give, I give an impression
of how you might broaden things out. So, you
know, there's all kinds of directions that you might
go off, go off in uh discussing epistemic injustice.
Uh If you're thinking about justice in the area
of um people being oppressed in their capacity, as
know, as then you're thinking about epistemic injustice and
that might take a, a number of different forms,
right? So just one more question then uh here
in the particular case of epistemic injustice, you're also
bringing into the table. Uh Wittgenstein and his philosophy,
right? Particularly I guess his philosophy of language if
I understand it correctly. So in what way do
the Wittgenstein approach here also apply or be relevant
to discussions of epistemic injustice.
OK. So I, I mean, I've only just started
this project myself. So I, I haven't actually written
a huge amount on how this might, how this
might work out. But in, in very sort of
broad brushstroke terms, Fensin, as I say, he conceived
our philosophy as being concerned with uh conceptual or
grammatical problems. And given that a lot of the
discussions within uh the field of epistemic injustice are
philosophical um and conceptual that it's clear that Wittgenstein's
philosophy is going to have an application then. Um
SO one of the things that I started looking
at is uh the question of the relationship between
knowledge and certainty. So this is something that Fricker
raises in her book, Epistemic Injustice. She wonders whether
there's a confidence condition to knowledge, whether whether people
have to be confident of what whatever it is
that they know in order to be said to
know or whether they have to be certain uh
in order to know. Um And obviously, Fensin S
work is useful in reflecting on the relationships between
knowledge and certainty. He wrote on certainty, which contains,
yeah, you know, lots of interesting reflections um on
how exactly knowledge and certainty are related to each
other and how exactly we are to understand knowledge
and certainty. So I think that's just one example
of how Fensin might be useful in uh in
understanding issues of epistemic injustice. Um I mean, I'm,
I'm not the first to do this. So, Fensin
S work has been used in discussions of uh
epistemic injustice already. So, one of the ways in
which it's been used is to, to think about
the potential for um Fensin S understanding of hinge
epistemology um to be used in discussions of epistemic
injustice. Um Yeah. And there, there were discussions of
fensin and relativism and uh and epistemic uh epistemic
injustice, lots and lots of different ways in which
you might go off.
Great. So, um just to mention your book again,
it's Wittgenstein and the Cognitive Science of religion, interpreting
human nature and the mind. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Doctor Vinton just before we go apart from the
book, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah. Um So I'm, I'm affiliated to uh Nova
University, as you say, in particular, I'm affiliated to
Ill Nova uh which is the Philosophy um institute
at Nova. Uh I'm a researcher there. So I
have a page on the Ifill Nova website. Uh
That's IFI Lno va dot pt, if people want
to look me up there. Um I also have
an academia page, a research gate page. Uh THE
the usual kind of research pages. I'm on those
if people want to look me up there. Um
And I'm also a member of the, the Lisbon
Mind and Cognition Group and I have a page
on their web page. So if people want to
look me up on that page, you can do.
And um I mean, that's an interesting group as
well if people wanna look into the activities of
the Lisbon Mining Cognition group.
Ok, great. So, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah. Thank you very much for, for inviting me
on to the show. It's, it's great. Thanks.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba Adam hunt Pavlo Stassi
na Me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder. Douglas
Fry Franca la Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams the
Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Ebon, Starry
Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No week in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Von Goler,
Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Toni. Tom Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon,
Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits
and Rosie. Thank you for all.